# Welcome to Roy' Secret Garden!

> <div style="font-family: 'Copperplate', sans-serif;">Il faut cultiver notre jardin -- Candide</div>

Greetings, travelers! Welcome to my humble corner of the internet. I am Roy Kid, an adventurer in the world of academia. Please, take a moment to rest your weary feet and peruse my latest discoveries and musings. Perhaps we can even embark on a quest of knowledge together!

I am studying for my Ph.D. at Uppsala University in Sweden in [Zhang Chao](https://tec-group.github.io/) & [Daniel Brandell](https://www.katalog.uu.se/empinfo/?id=N99-854)'s Group, researching solid electrolytes in lithium-ion batteries. I have been involved in computational work focused on molecular dynamics simulations, and am currently expanding my skills to include the development and application of machine learning force field and quantum calculations.

Prior to joining Zhang's Group, I earned my Master's degree from the University of Science and Technology of China. Additionally, I had the fortunate opportunity to work as an intern at DP Tech, where I contributed to the development of [DMFF](https://github.com/deepmodeling/DMFF) under the supervision of Zhang Linfeng and Yu Kuang. DMFF (Differentiable Molecular Force Field) is a Jax-based python package that provides a full differentiable implementation of molecular force field models. This project aims to establish an extensible codebase to minimize the efforts in force field parameterization, and to ease the force and virial tensor evaluations for advanced complicated potentials (e.g., polarizable models with geometry-dependent atomic parameters).

I am passionate about coding and maintaining open-source projects, which allow me to make meaningful contributions to the wider community while also refining my programming abilities. Currently, I am currently developing a tool called [MolPy](https://github.com/Roy-Kid/molpy) with the aim of creating a versatile and efficient front-end for computational chemistry calculations. The goal is to provide researchers with an versitile and flexible data-structure that can help them streamline their workflows and enhance their scientific productivity. I believe that `MolPy` has the potential to benefit a wide range of research projects in computational chemistry. In addition to developing `MolPy`, I am also working on an interactive molecular visualization called [MolVis](https://github.com/Roy-Kid/molvis) that will allow researchers to visualize and inspect system structures in on-the-fly and manipulate the view by terminal and command-line. This complementary tool will provide users a way to visualize the models generated in `MolPy`.


